Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. today we're going
to look at transformations of the plane starting
with translations and then moving on to rotations
and Reflections this is going to be an opportunity
for us to address some important foundational
issues having to do with functions maps and
mappings and I warn you that the approach that
we're going to take here is quite different from
the usual treatment that modern mathematics takes
to functions it has many advantages that I hope
you will consider so naively what a translation is
is easy to describe we have our grid plane here in
the usual fashion and suppose we're looking at a
translation 31 by a vector over 3 up one okay so
that translation mov moves everything over three
and up one that's intuitively what we're trying
to get at so this point is moved to that point
this circle is moved to that Circle this square
is moved to that square and a line like this L is
moved to this line M and you can see that because
say this point here gets moved to there this
point here gets moved to there this point here
gets moved to there and so on so we have an idea
intuitively in metrically what it means what is it
exactly how do we Define a translation well modern
mathematics has several words that cover this kind
of object sometimes called a transformation
sometimes a function sometimes a map sometimes
a mapping and in most mathematics texts the
treatment would be something like this they would
say well to 31 is going to be a map from the plane
to the plane from R2 to R2 and it's given by this
expression to of 31 acting on the point XY is the
point x + 3 y + 1 this certainly captures what the
transformation does but there's a lot of things
wrong with this setup such as what well such as
first of all it involves infinite sets we're not
interested in considering infinite sets because
they don't exist secondly we're working over the
rational numbers completely we have not and got
anywhere close to talking about the real numbers
which are very very complicated but that's really
a minor issue it's really this point here that
we're going to look at quite differently because
this treatment of a translation only makes it act
on points if you want the translation to act on
circles or squares or any other objects it's a
secondary kind of thing that's a little a little
bit more indirect in other words there's a lack of
flexibility with this notion of translation that
we're going to circumvent also we're going to end
up writing things differently we're going to put
things back to front so let's see how we're going
to approach what a translation is so our approach
is going to treat this to 31 as an expression
and we're going to specify how that expression
interacts with other expressions so the main thing
that we're going to say is that if we have a point
XY then XY followed by to 31 that expression is
by definition equal to the point x + 3 y + 1 so
we Define the translation in terms of how that
expression interacts with that expression to
give us another expression here's a more official
definition if V is a vector then the translation
by V is the expression to subv and furthermore if
a is a point in other words if a has the type of
point then a followed by to of V is by definition
a + V where we've Define this previously this
means the point that you get by starting with
a and moving in the direction V from from a
that defines a new type of mathematical object
called a translation or we'll say TR for short
so a translation is just an expression like this
and this is the definition of how it acts on a
point now when we have something like this there's
an ambiguity or there's a possible flexibility
in thinking about it we can think that this is
the point a acted on by the translation but we
can also think of this as being the translation
input with the point a in other words which one
of these two things we consider first is up to us
the expression itself does not prefer either the
a or the to subv one is to the left one is to the
right but neither of them has priority it's just
both of them together gives us the new Point
let's look at an example if we take the point
A3 and apply the translation to 3 3 1 then we add
three to this we add 1 to this we get 114 when we
take the 91 act with the translation we get 122
now the line L that's through these two points
83 and 91 is this line L 2 to 1 to -19 I remind
you that the formula is y1 - Y2 that's the first
one then X1 X2 rather minus X1 that's the second
one and this expression here is this * this minus
this * this this line has the equation 2x + y
- 19 = 0 but the line itself is actually that
expression there there's another situation where a
mathematical object is actually just an expression
that will be very common for us let's consider
another line the line M through the points 114
and 122 namely these two points that's the line
2 to 1 to - 26 with this equation now back in
the first slide these were the lines l and m that
we were talking about you can check that uh those
points actually agree so it makes sense now to
say well this translation which is moving points
over three and up one also takes this line L to
this line M how do we arrange that well we say
that in general if if we have a vector v RS and
a line L equals A to B to C then we can make a
new expression by taking the line L and applying
the translation V and that's going to be another
line in this example here if we take this L and we
apply the translation to 31 then we get this line
M in general you can check that the formula is if
you translate this line L in exactly the same way
as we've done here here you will get the line A
to B to C - a r - b s so this is the definition
of how a line and a translation combine to give
you another line so we see that this translation
is actually a flexible thing it can act on points
it can act on lines and later on we'll see that
it can act on many other things so it's not
restricted to Simply acting on points or acting
on lines or anything else it's definition can be
extended to more and more things now let's have
a look at how we combine translations combining
translations is usually called composition and
here's our rule for composing two translations so
if we have to V and to u v and U are vectors then
we Define this expression this combination to be
to V + U that's how we Define what this product
of two translations is and now one proves that for
a point A or a line L if we start with the point
a and we apply the translation TV in other words
if we look at this expression a TV that's another
point and then we apply to u to that that's
another point then that's the same as starting
with the point a and applying this composite
translation TV time Tu and similarly if we
start with a line and First Act with a translation
by V and then act by translation by the vector U
that's the same as starting with the line L and
acting by this composite translation that means
that we can write when we have an expression
like this we can write simply a followed by
the translation V followed by the translation
U which means we start with this then we apply
this then we apply this and we've arranged things
so that the brackets are unnecessary it doesn't
matter how we bracket things it's a consistent
expression throughout this is a very nice way of
thinking about Transformations the thing we start
with then the next transformation then another
transformation if we have one and so on next time
we're going to apply the same kind of thinking to
Reflections and rotations I hope you'll join
me for that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for
listening